# Moldovan Coffin Maker to Exit Coffin Manufacturing Business


**Case Type:** [new product, new
technology](https://www.consultingcase101.com/tag/new-product/); [pricing &
valuation](https://www.consultingcase101.com/tag/pricing-valuation/).
**Consulting Firm:** [McKinsey &
Company](https://www.consultingcase101.com/tag/mckinsey-company/) first round
full time job interview.  **Industry Coverage:**
[manufacturing](https://www.consultingcase101.com/tag/manufacturing/).

**Case Interview Question #00689:** Our client Moldovan Coffins is a high-end
coffin maker in the country of Moldova. Moldova, officially the Republic of
Moldova, is a landlocked country in Eastern Europe located between Romania to
the west and Ukraine to the north, east, and south. Moldova declared itself an
independent ![handcrafted
coffin](https://www.consultingcase101.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/01/handcrafted-coffin.jpg
"handcrafted coffin")state with the same boundaries as the Moldavian Soviet
Socialist Republic in 1991 as part of the dissolution of the Soviet Union. The
total population of the country amounted to 4 million (2004 Moldovan census).

The owner of Moldovan Coffins business has seen substantial change in his
market in recent years and is contemplating the future of his business. Up
until now, he has been in the business of building high-quality, handcrafted
coffins largely by hand with a skilled labor force. Recently, however, he has
become aware of a new technology <span id="more-3311"></span>that would allow
him to build machine-made coffins with much less labor. Should he invest in
this new technology? And should he even remain in the coffin-making business in
the first place? Why or why not?

**Possible Solution:**

Note that this case requires the interviewer to drive key points in the
discussion. Allow the candidate to formulate a plan and then prompt him/her to
consider each of the topics listed below.

**Question #1:** What strategic alternatives should the owner of the coffin
business consider?

**Possible Answer:**

If the candidate doesn’t get all of this, help them along since we need to lay
this foundation for the rest of the case – We need to decide firstly whether to
stay in the coffin business at all and if so, whether he uses the new
technology:

Option 1: Sell the business to a third party  Option 2: Sell the assets of the
company and shut it down  Option 3: Keep operating as is  Option 4: Keep
operating and invest in the new technology

**Question #2:** How would you figure out the current value of the coffin
business? Provide the following additional information if the candidate asks
for it clearly and directly.

Market Size – If the candidate asks for the size of the market, first make
him/her brainstorm about different ways to determine market size. A good
candidate should come up with at least 4 different ways, such as:

*   Calculate from the market’s total population, population growth, and birth
*   rate.  Review of death records for a period of time.  Take sample of the
*   number of obituaries in paper serving given population base.  Calculate
*   from total population, average life expectancy.

**Question #3:** Now make the candidate calculate the market size, giving them
the following data:

*   Population of Moldova: 4 million Population Growth: 0% Average Life
*   Expectancy: 75 years Age Distribution: assume a flat age distribution, i.e.
*   same number of people at every age.  Burial Customs: 75% of deaths are
*   buried in coffins.

**Possible Answer:**

(4 million) x (1/75) * (75%) = 40,000 coffins purchased per year.

Note that the candidate needs to quickly realize that every year, 1/75th of the
total population will turn 76 and therefore (on average) will die.

**Question #4:** Now make the candidate calculate the value of Moldovan
Coffins’ business, giving them the following data:

Price – Coffins are priced at $5,000 for a hand-made high-end coffin.

Costs – Material accounts for 10% of the direct cost, while labor accounts for
the other 90%. COGS is $4,800 per coffin. Fixed costs for the business are
$700,000 per year. Assume all assets are fully depreciated and ignore taxes.

Competition – The client Moldovan Coffins has a 10% market share and a relative
market share of about 1 (if asked, you may explain that relative market share
is the ratio of the company’s market share to that of its nearest competitor.)

Market Trends, Regulation, etc. – If asked about any exogenous factors, simply
tell the candidate to assume that the market is expected to continue as it
currently is.

**Possible Answer:**

The candidate needs to calculate the value of the business now. This is a pure
mathematical exercise.

*   Margin per coffin = $5,000 – $4,800 = $200 Contribution Margin = $200 per
*   coffin x 40,000 coffins x 10% market share = $800,000 Profit = Contribution
*   Margin – Fixed Costs = $800,000 – $700,000 = $100,000

Assuming a discount rate of 10% (candidate can assume anything reasonable here
as long as they are consistent later), a perpetuity with cash flows of $100,000
per year has a present value of $100,000 / 0.1 = $1 Million. So the current
business is worth $1M whether they keep it or sell it.

**Question #5:** So now what is the value of the company if it were shut down
and the assets were sold? Additional Information to give if asked:

Assets – Since the firm has been building coffins by hand, the fixed assets are
essentially only the land and improvements. These are owned outright by the
company.

When the candidate asks for the value of the land, have them brainstorm ways
that they might determine this. They should come up with at least 3 good ways,
such as:

*   Look for comparable real estate and determine recent selling price.  Find
*   comparable commercial real estate and determine the rent per square foot,
*   then discount the cash flows generated by renting the property.  Determine
*   rate of appreciation for property in the area and then apply to book value
*   of current land and improvements.

Give the candidate the following information and have them calculate the value
of the property:

*   Book Value of Land: $20,000 Book Value of Improvements: $80,000 Years
*   Owned: 48 Average Real Estate Appreciation: 6% / year

**Possible Answer:**

Using the “rule of 72″, a 6% growth rate will double the investment every 72/6
= 12 years. Since the property was held for 48 years, the current value will be
$100K * (2 x 2 x 2 x 2) = $1.6M.

Since the assets ($1.6M) are higher than the value of the discounted cash flows
($1M), then it would make more sense to liquidate the business and sell the
assets.

**Question #6:** What would the value of the company be if the owner invests in
the new technology? Provide the following information if asked:

Investment – Investing in the new technology will cost the firm $1M.

Cost Savings – Material costs remain the same, but labor costs are reduced by
50%.

Proprietary Nature of Technology – The new coffin-making technology is being
offered for sale by a machine tool company, who holds the patent. They are not
offering exclusivity to any customers (i.e. they will sell to Moldovan Coffin’s
competitors if possible).

Competitive Threat – It is not known whether the competitors have acquired or
are planning to acquire this new coffin-making technology.

Customer Preferences – While the machine-made coffins are not “hand made”, the
quality perceived by the customer is the same or better. It is believed that
the customer will be indifferent between the quality and appearance of a
hand-made and a machine-made coffin.

Brand Impact – The candidate may argue that a machine-made coffin might
negatively impact Moldovan Coffin’s brand. If so, ask them how they would test
this (e.g. consumer research), but tell them to assume that it would have
negligible impact.

**Possible Answer:**

Since Moldovan Coffins has no proprietary control over the technology, it is
likely that competitors will also acquire it, resulting in an overall lowering
of the industry cost structure. If this is the case, price will also fall as
competition cuts price in an attempt to gain share. If we assume that gross
margins remain the same, since the industry competitive structure has not
changed we can calculate the new margin contribution as follows:

*   Gross Margin = $200 / $5,000 = 4% Labor Cost = (4800 x 90%) x 50% = $2,160
*   Material Cost = 4800 x 10% = $480 COGS = $2,160 + $480 = $2,640 Price =
*   $2,640 / (1 – 4%) = $2,718 Contribution Margin = $2,718 – $2,640 = $78 per
*   coffin Profit/Loss = $78 * 4,000 – $700,000 = -$388,000

So the introduction of the new technology to the market might be expected to
reduce industry profits, making this business completely unprofitable.

Candidates could argue other scenarios, by assuming that the industry would be
able to maintain higher margins than we have assumed here, so the answer may be
different. They should recognize, however, that the introduction of this
non-proprietary technology will significantly reduce industry pricing in the
absence of some other form of price support (such as branding, collusion
between players, etc.)

**7\. Conclusion**

A star candidate will see that his/her time is nearly up and will present a
recommendation for the client without prompting. If the interview is within 3
minutes of the end, ask: “The owner just called and said he has an offer to buy
his business. He needs to know whether he should take it right now.”

**Possible Answer:**

Given the credible threat of the industry becoming unprofitable due to the
introduction of this new technology, the owner should look to sell the company
as soon as possible. Taking into account the assets of the firm and the present
value of the expected cash flows of the business itself, he should attempt to
liquidate the business and to sell the assets for around $1.6M.

If the owner is unable to sell the business now, he can continue to operate the
business as a cash cow, but should not invest in the business above what is
necessary to keep it operating at its present level. He should expect the
business to become less profitable as the industry moves to mechanization, and
should eventually look to sell the assets of the company and close the firm.

**Comments:**

This case was given by McKinsey in one of their first-round interviews and is a
typical “command and control” style McKinsey case. In this style of case, the
interviewer allows the candidate to drive the case initially to explore
possible routes to a solution. However, once the candidate has laid out a plan,
the interviewer takes control and asks the candidate to solve a few specific
problems before coming to the final conclusion.

When giving this case, allow for some initial planning and brainstorming by the
candidate, but then firmly take control of each of the “modules” described in
the case. Try to move the candidate along through each of them, since in the
actual interview only those candidates that complete all of the sections will
be considered to have done well. This case tests mental horsepower and the
ability to move to conclusions quickly.

